# v0.4.0: Userland rules, rebrand, and global cache! ⚡

[You can download this release from Github](https://github.com/AbstractMachinesLab/zap/releases/tag/v0.4.0#user-content-assets)

### ⚡ New name!

And we've got the manual website up, and a twitter account. Getting more
serious with this as an Abstract Machiness FOSS tool 🚀 

Twitter: [@zap_build](https://twitter.com/zap_build)

WWW: [zap.build](https://zap.build)

### 💻 Reworked CLI Targets

Zap is set up now to provide high-level commands, but also comes with a number
of subcommands to inspect the Workspace status and your targets. All the
targets share a common setup step where they'll validate the entire workspace
and bootstrap it if they find a Workspace.toml file.

You can call:

`zap help` to get help on any command.

`zap rules` to inspect the rules that are available, and even print out what
are the steps needed to carry them out are, and what outputs they would create.

`zap workspace info` lets you inspect your workspace configuration and paths.

`zap toolchains` lets you manage your toolchains and inspect which ones are
available, installed, and configured.

`zap target list` lets you list all the workspace targets

`zap depgraph print [target]` will give you the dependency graph in GraphViz
Dot format. Take it over to edotor.net and make some pretty graphs! But also
remember you can pass in a specific build target to this command, to show the
relevant subset of the build graph that is needed to build it.

`zap cache clear [target]` will clear from the cache a single target. Use
sparingly, and if it fixes your build, this is a bug! (Assuming you're not
writing custom rules, etc).

Lastly `zap build [target]` will build the target.

And my favorite, `zap` is an alias to `zap build //...`.

### 🗃️ Workspace.toml and Build.toml

The old `workspace` and `crane` files needed additional annotations to get good
editor support, and that was kind of a drag. Instead Zap is embracing TOML as
its configuration format.

The `workspace` file now becomes `Workspace.toml`, and the `crane` file used to
designate build packages is now called `Build.toml`.

### 🧰  Toolchains are part of the Build Graph  now

This means that Zap will only build them if you need to build a particular
library with them! 

For example, say you have configured the Deno and Elixir toolchains in your
Workspace.toml file.

If you never build anything that relies on the Elixir toolchain, Zap won't
build it.

So if you want to build the entire thing, just run `zap`! All of the targets
will be built, and only the toolchains that are required will be built.

### 🔧 Extensible Rules and Toolchains in JavaScript

You can write them in JavaScript and they will run with an embedded Deno
runtime. This is kind of huge because in ~50 lines of JS you can integrate any
new language or tool, and create custom rules that will override the default
ones.

In the future we will restrict what Javascript can be written, to help you
write better rules and toolchains. This restrictions will make JavaScript a
_non-turing complete language_, which I think we'll call BuildScript.

There'll be more of this written in the https://zap.build website

### 🥪 Global cache, local sandboxing, and local outputs

Zap keeps a global cache in `~/.cache/zap/_user_${USER}/cache` and there you'll
find the toolchains and all of the things that are being built. This cache
structure is internal, and will change over time.

To help you access your project's outputs, Zap now symlinks a `zap-outputs`
folder to the root of your workspace where you can find a tree with all of the
outputs.

This tree will be reconciled every time you build, so its safe to remove.

### 📦 Single, super tiny binary!

All of this and we're still managing to publish a tiny binary that is just under 6 mb compressed 👌🏼 -- thank goodness to the Rust ecosystem for the tips & tricks.

Multi-architecture releases supported by Github Actions are out as well.
